---
title: Substance and Form: Categorical Foundations of Set Theory - Marc Muhleisen
collection: talks
permalink: /talks/2022-12-06-talk-7
location: "DRL 4N49"
date: 2022-12-06

---

Sets and membership are often considered the most fundamental concepts in math, a belief reflected in the wildly successful axioms of ZFC. On the one hand, these axioms concisely express our deepest convictions about sets; on the other, they can encode and prove a great deal of theorems in essentially every mathematical discipline. And yet, to what extent does your work rely on no set being an element of itself (i.e. the axiom of foundation)? And tell me, are the 7-adic integers an element of the 7-sphere? These silly questions (where in both cases the answer is ambiguous and doesn’t remotely matter) underlie serious criticisms of a good foundational framework. On the one hand, the ZFC axioms do not directly reflect the tools of many “working mathematicians”; on the other, there is a massive disconnect between what a given set might be used for and what its elements are. 

Enter Lawvere, who in the mid-1960s proposed a new axiomatization called the “Elementary Theory of the Category of Sets” (ETCS). He takes sets and functions as the fundamental concepts, using universal properties to build sets rather than extensionality. In this talk, we will sketch Lawvere’s approach to set theory, contrast ETCS with ZFC in a couple toy examples, and prove some groundwork theorems like Peano’s postulates in the ETCS framework. Time permitting, we’ll also sketch a proof that ETCS characterizes the category of sets up to equivalence. Some references for this talk are Lawvere’s original paper, Leinster’s brief article “Rethinking Set Theory,” and Todd Trimble’s nLab entry “fully formal ETCS.”
